THE ABOLITIONIST PROJECT

INTRODUCTION This talk is about suffering and how to get rid of it.
The abolitionist project outlines how biotechnology will abolish
suffering throughout the living world.  Our descendants will be animated
by gradients of genetically preprogrammed well-being that are orders of
magnitude richer than today's peak experiences.

First, I'm going to outline why it's technically feasible to abolish
the biological substrates of any kind of unpleasant experience -
psychological pain as well as physical pain.  Secondly, I'm going to
argue for the overriding moral urgency of the abolitionist project,
whether or not one is any kind of ethical utilitarian.  Thirdly, I'm
going to argue why a revolution in biotechnology means it's going to
happen, albeit not nearly as fast as it should.

1: WHY IT IS TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE Sadly, what won't abolish suffering,
or at least not on its own, is socio-economic reform, or exponential
economic growth, or technological progress in the usual sense, or any
of the traditional panaceas for solving the world's ills. Improving the
external environment is admirable and important; but such improvement
can't recalibrate our hedonic treadmill above a genetically constrained
ceiling. Twin studies confirm there is a [partially] heritable
set-point of well-being - or ill-being - around which we all tend to
fluctuate over the course of a lifetime. This set-point varies between
individuals. [It's possible to lower an individual's hedonic set-point
by inflicting prolonged uncontrolled stress; but even this re-set is not
as easy as it sounds: suicide-rates typically go down in wartime; and
six months after a quadriplegia-inducing accident, studies1 suggest that
we are typically neither more nor less unhappy than we were before the
catastrophic event.] Unfortunately, attempts to build an ideal society
can't overcome this biological ceiling, whether utopias of the left
or right, free-market or socialist, religious or secular, futuristic
high-tech or simply cultivating one's garden. Even if everything that
traditional futurists have asked for is delivered - eternal youth,
unlimited material wealth, morphological freedom, superintelligence,
immersive VR, molecular nanotechnology, etc - there is no evidence that
our subjective quality of life would on average significantly surpass
the quality of life of our hunter-gatherer ancestors - or a New Guinea
tribesman today - in the absence of reward pathway enrichment. This claim
is difficult to prove in the absence of sophisticated neuroscanning; but
objective indices of psychological distress e.g. suicide rates, bear it
out. Unenhanced humans will still be prey to the spectrum of Darwinian
emotions, ranging from terrible suffering to petty disappointments and
frustrations - sadness, anxiety, jealousy, existential angst. Their
biology is part of "what it means to be human". Subjectively unpleasant
states of consciousness exist because they were genetically adaptive. Each
of our core emotions had a distinct signalling role in our evolutionary
past: they tended to promote behaviours that enhanced the inclusive
fitness of our genes in the ancestral environment.

So if manipulating our external environment alone can never abolish
suffering and malaise, what does technically work?

Here are three scenarios in ascending order of sociological plausibility:

    a) wireheading b) utopian designer drugs c) genetic engineering and -
    what I want to focus on - the impending reproductive revolution of
    designer babies

    a) Recall wireheading is direct stimulation of the pleasure centres2
    of the brain via implanted electrodes. Intracranial self-stimulation
    shows no physiological or subjective tolerance i.e. it's just as
    rewarding after two days as it is after two minutes. Wireheading
    doesn't harm others; it has a small ecological footprint; it
    banishes psychological and physical pain; and arguably it's a
    lot less offensive to human dignity than having sex. Admittedly,
    lifelong wireheading sounds an appealing prospect only to a handful
    of severe depressives. But what are the technical arguments against
    its adoption?

    Well, wireheading is not an evolutionarily stable solution:
    there would be selection pressure against its widespread
    adoption. Wireheading doesn't promote nurturing behaviour:
    wireheads, whether human or non-human, don't want to raise baby
    wireheads. Uniform, indiscriminate bliss in the guise of wireheading
    or its equivalents would effectively bring the human experiment to an
    end, at least if it were adopted globally. Direct neurostimulation of
    the reward centres destroys informational sensitivity to environmental
    stimuli. So assuming we want to be smart - and become smarter - we
    have a choice. Intelligent agents can have a motivational structure
    based on gradients of ill-being, characteristic of some lifelong
    depressives today. Or intelligent agents can have our current typical
    mixture of pleasures and pains. Or alternatively, we could have an
    informational economy of mind based entirely on [adaptive] gradients
    of cerebral bliss - which I'm going to argue for.

    Actually, this dismissal of wireheading may be too quick. In the
    far future, one can't rule out offloading everything unpleasant or
    mundane onto inorganic supercomputers, prostheses and robots while we
    enjoy uniform orgasmic bliss. Or maybe not orgasmic bliss, possibly
    some other family of ideal states that simply couldn't be improved
    upon. But that's speculative. Whatever our ultimate destination, it
    would be more prudent, I think, to aim for both superhappiness and
    superintelligence - at least until we understand the full implications
    of what we are doing. There isn't a moral urgency to maximizing
    superhappiness in the same way as there is to abolishing suffering.

    [It's worth noting that the offloading option assumes that inorganic
    computers, prostheses and robots don't - or at least needn't -
    experience subjective phenomenal pain even if their functional
    architecture allows them to avoid and respond to noxious stimuli. This
    absence of inorganic suffering is relatively uncontroversial with
    existing computers - switching off one's PC doesn't have ethical
    implications, and a silicon robot can be programmed to avoid corrosive
    acids without experiencing agony if it's damaged. It's debatable
    whether any computational system with a classical von Neumann
    architecture will ever be interestingly conscious. I'm sceptical;
    but either way, it doesn't affect the offloading option, unless
    one argues that the subjective texture of suffering is functionally
    essential to any system capable of avoiding harmful stimuli.]

    b) The second technical option for eradicating suffering is futuristic
    designer drugs. In an era of mature post-genomic medicine, will it
    be possible rationally to design truly ideal pleasure-drugs that
    deliver lifelong, high-functioning well-being without unacceptable
    side-effects? "Ideal pleasure drugs" here is just a piece of
    shorthand. Such drugs can in principle embrace cerebral, empathetic,
    aesthetic and perhaps spiritual well-being - and not just hedonistic
    pleasure in the usual one-dimensional and amoral sense.  We're not
    talking here about recreational euphoriants, which simply activate the
    negative feedback mechanisms of the brain; nor the shallow, opiated
    contentment of a Brave New World; nor drugs that induce euphoric
    mania, with its uncontrolled excitement, loss of critical insight,
    grandiosity and flight of ideas. Can we develop true wonderdrugs
    that deliver sublime well-being on a sustainable basis, recalibrating
    the hedonic treadmill to ensure a high quality of life for everyone?

    A lot of people recoil from the word "drugs" - which is understandable
    given today's noxious street drugs and their uninspiring medical
    counterparts. Yet even academics and intellectuals in our society
    typically take the prototypical dumb drug, ethyl alcohol. If it's
    socially acceptable to take a drug that makes you temporarily happy
    and stupid, then why not rationally design drugs to make people
    perpetually happier and smarter? Presumably, in order to limit
    abuse-potential, one would want any ideal pleasure drug to be akin -
    in one limited but important sense - to nicotine, where the smoker's
    brain finely calibrates its optimal level: there is no uncontrolled
    dose-escalation.

    There are of course all kinds of pitfalls to drug-based
    solutions. Technically, I think these pitfalls can be overcome,
    though I won't try to show this here. But there is a deeper
    issue. If there weren't something fundamentally wrong - or at
    least fundamentally inadequate - with our existing natural state of
    consciousness bequeathed by evolution, then we wouldn't be so keen
    to change it. Even when it's not unpleasant, everyday consciousness
    is mediocre compared to what we call peak experiences. Ordinary
    everyday consciousness was presumably adaptive in the sense it helped
    our genes leave more copies of themselves on the African savannah;
    but why keep it as our default-state indefinitely? Why not change
    human nature by literally repairing our genetic code?

    Again, this dismissal of pharmacological solutions may be too
    quick. Arguably, utopian designer drugs may always be useful for
    the fine-grained and readily reversible control of consciousness;
    and I think designer drugs will be an indispensable tool to explore
    the disparate varieties of conscious mind. But wouldn't it be better
    if we were all born with a genetic predisposition to psychological
    superhealth rather than needing chronic self-medication? Does even
    the most ardent abolitionist propose to give cocktails of drugs to
    all children from birth; and then to take such drug cocktails for
    the rest of our lives?

    c) So thirdly, there are genetic solutions, embracing both somatic
    and germline therapy.  By way of context, today there is a minority
    of people who are always depressed or dysthymic, albeit to varying
    degrees. Studies with mono- and dizygotic twins confirm there is a
    high degree of genetic loading for depression. Conversely, there are
    some people who are temperamentally optimistic. Beyond the optimists,
    there is a very small minority of people who are what psychiatrists
    call hyperthymic. Hyperthymic people aren't manic or bipolar;
    but by contemporary standards, they are always exceedingly happy,
    albeit sometimes happier than others. Hyperthymic people respond
    "appropriately" and adaptively to their environment. Indeed they
    are characteristically energetic, productive and creative. Even when
    they are blissful, they aren't "blissed out".

    Now what if, as a whole civilisation, we were to opt to become
    genetically hyperthymic - to adopt a motivational system driven
    entirely by adaptive gradients of well-being? More radically, as
    the genetic basis of hedonic tone is understood, might we opt to
    add multiple extra copies of hyperthymia-promoting genes/allelic
    combinations and their regulatory promoters - not abolishing
    homeostasis and the hedonic treadmill but shifting our hedonic
    set-point to a vastly higher level?

    Three points here: First, this genetic recalibration might
    seem to be endorsing another kind of uniformity; but it's worth
    recalling that happier people - and especially hyperdopaminergic
    people - are typically responsive to a broader range of potentially
    rewarding stimuli than depressives: they engage in more exploratory
    behaviour. This makes getting stuck in a sub-optimal rut less likely,
    both for the enhanced individual and posthuman society as a whole.

    Secondly, universal hyperthymia might sound like a gigantic
    experiment; and in a sense of course it is. But all sexual
    reproduction is an experiment. We play genetic roulette, shuffling
    our genes and then throwing the genetic dice. Most of us flinch at
    the word "eugenics"; but that's what we're effectively practising,
    crudely and incompetently, when we choose our prospective mates. The
    difference is that within the next few decades, prospective parents
    will be able to act progressively more rationally and responsibly in
    their reproductive decisions. Pre-implantation genetic screening is
    going to become routine; artificial wombs will release us from the
    constraints of the human birth-canal; and a revolution in reproductive
    medicine will begin to replace the old Darwinian lottery. The
    question is not whether a reproductive revolution is coming, but
    rather what kinds of being - and what kinds of consciousness -
    do we want to create?

    Thirdly, isn't this reproductive revolution going to be the
    prerogative of rich elites in the West? Probably not for long. Compare
    the brief lag between the introduction of, say, mobile phones and
    their world-wide adoption with the 50 year time-lag between the
    introduction and world-wide adoption of radio; and the 20 year lag
    between the introduction and world-wide penetration of television. The
    time-lag between the initial introduction and global acceptance of
    new technologies is shrinking rapidly. So of course is the price.

Anyway, one of the advantages of genetically recalibrating the hedonic
treadmill rather than abolishing it altogether, at least for the
foreseeable future, is that the functional analogues of pain, anxiety,
guilt and even depression can be preserved without their nasty raw feels
as we understand them today. We can retain the functional analogues of
discontent - arguably the motor of progress - and retain the discernment
and critical insight lacking in the euphorically manic. Even if hedonic
tone is massively enhanced, and even if our reward centres are physically
and functionally amplified, then it's still possible in principle to
conserve much of our existing preference architecture. If you prefer
Mozart to Beethoven, or philosophy to pushpin, then you can still retain
this preference ranking even if your hedonic tone is hugely enriched.

Now personally, I think it would be better if our preference architecture
were radically changed, and we pursued [please pardon the jargon] a
"re-encephalisation of emotion". Evolution via natural selection has left
us strongly predisposed to form all manner of dysfunctional preferences
that harm both ourselves and others for the benefit of our genes. Recall
Genghis Khan: “The greatest happiness is to scatter your enemy, to
drive him before you, to see his cities reduced to ashes, to see those
who love him shrouded in tears, and to gather into your bosom his wives
and daughters.”

Now I'm told academia isn't quite that bad, but even university life
has its forms of urbane savagery - its competitive status-seeking and
alpha-male dominance rituals: a zero-sum game with many losers. Too
many of our preferences reflect nasty behaviours and states of mind
that were genetically adaptive in the ancestral environment. Instead,
wouldn't it be better if we rewrote our own corrupt code? I've focused
here on genetically enhancing hedonic tone. Yet mastery of the biology
of emotion means that we'll be able, for instance, to enlarge our
capacity for empathy, functionally amplifying mirror neurons and
engineering a sustained increase in oxytocin-release to promote trust
and sociability. Likewise, we can identify the molecular signatures of,
say, spirituality, our aesthetic sense, or our sense of humour - and
modulate and "over-express" their psychological machinery too. From an
information-theoretic perspective, what is critical to an adaptive,
flexible, intelligent response to the world is not our absolute
point on a hedonic scale but that we are informationally sensitive
to differences. Indeed information theorists sometimes simply define
information as a "difference that makes a difference".

However, to stress again, this re-encephalisation of emotion is
optional. It's technically feasible to engineer the well-being of
all sentience and retain most but not all of our existing preference
architecture. The three technical options for abolishing suffering
presented here - wireheading, designer drugs and genetic engineering
- aren't mutually exclusive. Are they exhaustive? I don't know of
any other viable options. Some transhumanists believe we could one
day all be scanned, digitized and uploaded into inorganic computers
and reprogrammed. Well, perhaps, I'm sceptical; but in any case, this
proposal doesn't solve the suffering of existing organic life unless
we embrace so-called destructive uploading - a holocaust option I'm not
even going to consider here.

2: WHY IT SHOULD HAPPEN Assume that within the next few centuries we will
acquire these Godlike powers over our emotions. Assume, too, that the
signalling function of unpleasant experience can be replaced - either
through the recalibration argued for here, or through the offloading of
everything unpleasant or routine to inorganic prostheses, bionic implants
or inorganic computers - or perhaps through outright elimination in the
case of something like jealousy. Why should we all be abolitionists?

If one is a classical utilitarian, then the abolitionist project follows:
it's Bentham plus biotechnology. One doesn't have to be a classical
utilitarian to endorse the abolition of suffering; but all classical
utilitarians should embrace the abolitionist project. Bentham championed
social and legislative reform, which is great as far as it goes; but he
was working before the era of biotechnology and genetic medicine.

If one is a scientifically enlightened Buddhist, then the abolitionist
project follows too. Buddhists, uniquely among the world's religions,
focus on the primacy of suffering in the living world. Buddhists may
think that the Noble Eightfold Path offers a surer route to Nirvana
than genetic engineering; but it's hard for a Buddhist to argue in
principle against biotech if it works. Buddhists focus on relieving
suffering via the extinction of desire; yet it's worth noting this
extinction is technically optional, and might arguably lead to a stagnant
society. Instead it's possible both to abolish suffering and continue
to have all manner of desires.

Persuading followers of Islam and the Judeo-Christian tradition is more
of a challenge. But believers claim - despite anomalies in the empirical
evidence - that Allah/God is infinitely compassionate and merciful. So
if mere mortals can envisage the well-being of all sentience, it would
seem blasphemous to claim that God is more limited in the scope of
His benevolence.

Most contemporary philosophers aren't classical utilitarians or Buddhists
or theists. Why should, say, an ethical pluralist take the abolitionist
project seriously?  Here I want to take as my text Shakespeare's

    "For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache
    patiently" [Much Ado About Nothing, Scene Five, Act One (Leonato
    speaking)]

When one is gripped by excruciating physical pain, one is always shocked
at just how frightful it can be.  It's tempting to suppose that purely
"psychological" pain - loneliness, rejection, existential angst, grief,
anxiety, depression - can't be as atrocious as extreme physical pain;
yet the reason over 800,000 people in the world take their own lives
every year is mainly psychological distress. It's not that other things -
great art, friendship, social justice, a sense of humour, cultivating
excellence of character, academic scholarship, etc - aren't valuable;
but rather when intense physical or psychological distress intrudes -
either in one's own life or that of a loved one - we recognize that this
intense pain has immediate priority and urgency. If you are in agony
after catching your hand in the door, then you'd give short shrift to
someone who urged you to remember the finer things in life. If you're
distraught after an unhappy love affair, then you don't want to be
tactlessly reminded it's a beautiful day outside.

OK, while it lasts, extreme pain or psychological distress has an
urgency and priority that overrides the rest of one's life projects;
but so what? When the misery passes, why not just get on with one's life
as before?  Well, natural science aspires to "a view from nowhere",
a notional God's-eye view. Physics tells us that no here-and-now is
privileged over any other; all are equally real. Science and technology
are shortly going to give us Godlike powers over the entire living world
to match this Godlike perspective. I argue that so long as there is
any sentient being who is undergoing suffering similar to our distress,
that suffering should be tackled with the same priority and urgency as
if it were one's own pain or the pain of a loved one. With power comes
complicity. Godlike powers carry godlike responsibilities. Thus the
existence of suffering 200 years ago, for instance, may indeed have been
terrible; but it's not clear that such suffering can sensibly be called
"immoral" - because there wasn't much that could be done about it. But
thanks to biotechnology, now there is - or shortly will be. Over the
next few centuries, suffering of any kind is going to become optional.

If you're not a classical ethical utilitarian, the advantage of
recalibrating the hedonic treadmill rather than simply seeking to
maximise superhappiness is that you are retaining at least a recognizable
descendant of our existing preference architecture. Recalibration
of the hedonic treadmill can be made consistent with your existing
value scheme. Hence even the ill-named "preference utilitarian" can be
accommodated. Indeed control over the emotions means that you can pursue
your existing life projects more effectively.  And what about the alleged
character-building function of suffering? "That which does not crush me
makes me stronger”, said Nietzsche. This worry seems misplaced. Other
things being equal, enhancing hedonic tone strengthens motivation - it
makes us psychologically more robust. By contrast, prolonged low mood
leads to a syndrome of learned helplessness and behavioural despair.

I haven't explicitly addressed the value nihilist - the subjectivist
or ethical sceptic who says all values are simply matters of opinion,
and that one can't logically derive an "ought" from an "is".  Well,
let's say I find myself in agony because my hand is on a hot stove. That
agony is intrinsically motivating, even if my conviction that I ought to
withdraw my hand doesn't follow the formal canons of logical inference.
If one takes the scientific world-picture seriously, then there is
nothing ontologically special or privileged about here-and-now or me -
the egocentric illusion is a trick of perspective engineered by selfish
DNA.  If it's wrong for me to be in agony, then it is wrong for anyone,
anywhere.

3: WHY IT WILL HAPPEN OK, it's technically feasible. A world without
suffering would be wonderful; and full-blown paradise-engineering
even better. But again, so what? It's technically feasible to build a
thousand-metre cube of cheddar cheese. Why is a pain-free world going to
happen? Perhaps it's just wishful thinking. Perhaps we'll opt to retain
the biology of suffering indefinitely3.

The counterargument here is that whether or not one is sympathetic to
the abolitionist project, we are heading for a reproductive revolution
of designer babies. Prospective parents are soon going to be choosing
the characteristics of their future children. We're on the eve of the
Post-Darwinian Transition, not in the sense that selection pressure will
be any less severe, but evolution will no longer be "blind" and "random":
there will no longer be natural selection but unnatural selection. We
will be choosing the genetic makeup of our future offspring, selecting
and designing alleles and allelic combinations in anticipation of their
consequences. There will be selection pressure against nastier alleles
and allelic combinations that were adaptive in the ancestral environment.

Unfortunately, this isn't a rigorous argument, but imagine you are
choosing the genetic dial-settings for mood - the hedonic set-point -
of your future children. What settings would you pick? You might not
want gradients of lifelong superhappiness, but the overwhelming bulk of
parents will surely want to choose happy children. For a start, they
are more fun to raise. Most parents across most cultures say, I think
sincerely, that they want their children to be happy. One may be sceptical
of parents who say happiness is the only thing they care about for their
kids - many parents are highly ambitious. But other things being equal,
happiness signals success - possibly the ultimate evolutionary origin
of why we value the happiness of our children as well as our own.

Of course the parental choice argument isn't decisive. Not least, it's
unclear how many more generations of free reproductive choices lie ahead
before radical antiaging technologies force a progressively tighter
collective control over our reproductive decisions - since a swelling
population of ageless quasi-immortals can't multiply indefinitely in
finite physical space. But even if centralised control of reproductive
decisions becomes the norm, and procreation itself becomes rare, the
selection pressure against primitive Darwinian genotypes will presumably
be intense. Thus it's hard to envisage what future social formations would
really allow the premeditated creation of any predisposition to depressive
or anxiety disorders - or even the "normal" pathologies of unenhanced
consciousness.  Non-Human Animals So far I've focused on suffering in just
one species. This restriction of the abolitionist project is parochial;
but our anthropocentric bias is deeply rooted. Hunting, killing, and
exploiting members of other species enhanced the inclusive fitness of our
genes in the ancestral environment. [Here we are more akin to chimpanzees
than bonobos.] So unlike, say, the incest taboo, we don't have an innate
predisposition to find, say, hunting and exploiting non-human animals
wrong. We read that Irene Pepperberg's parrot, with whom we last shared
a common ancestor several hundred million years ago, had the mental age
of a three-year-old child. But it's still legal for so-called sportsmen
to shoot birds for fun. If sportsmen shot babies and toddlers of our
own species for fun, they'd be judged criminal sociopaths and locked up.

So there is a contrast: the lead story in the news media is often a
terrible case of human child abuse and neglect, an abducted toddler, or
abandoned Romanian orphans. Our greatest hate-figures are child abusers
and child murderers. Yet we routinely pay for the industrialized mass
killing of other sentient beings so we can eat them. We eat meat even
though there's a wealth of evidence that functionally, emotionally,
intellectually - and critically, in their capacity to suffer - the
non-human animals we factory-farm and kill are equivalent to human babies
and toddlers.

From a notional God's-eye perspective, I'd argue that morally we
should care just as much about the abuse of functionally equivalent
non-human animals as we do about members of our own species - about
the abuse and killing of a pig as we do about the abuse or killing of a
human toddler. This violates our human moral intuitions; but our moral
intuitions simply can't be trusted. They reflect our anthropocentric
bias - not just a moral limitation but an intellectual and perceptual
limitation too. It's not that there are no differences between human and
non-human animals, any more than there are no differences between black
people and white people, freeborn citizens and slaves, men and women,
Jews and gentiles, gays or heterosexuals. The question is rather: are they
morally relevant differences? This matters because morally catastrophic
consequences can ensue when we latch on to a real but morally irrelevant
difference between sentient beings. [Recall how Aristotle, for instance,
defended slavery. How could he be so blind?] Our moral intuitions are
poisoned by genetic self-interest - they weren't designed to take an
impartial God's-eye view. But greater intelligence brings a greater
cognitive capacity for empathy - and potentially an extended circle of
compassion. Maybe our superintelligent/superempathetic descendants will
view non-human animal abuse as no less abhorrent than we view child abuse:
a terrible perversion.

True or not, surely we aren't going to give up eating each other? Our
self-interested bias is too strong. We like the taste of meat too
much. Isn't the notion of global veganism just utopian dreaming?  Perhaps
so. Yet within a few decades, the advent of genetically-engineered vatfood
means that we can enjoy eating "meat" tastier than anything available
today - without any killing and cruelty. As a foretaste of what's in
store, the In Vitro Meat Consortium was initiated at a workshop held
at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences in June 2007. Critically,
growing meat from single stem-cells is likely to be scalable indefinitely:
its global mass consumption is potentially cheaper than using intact
non-human animals. Therefore - assuming that for the foreseeable future
we retain the cash nexus and market economics - cheap, delicious vatfood
is likely to displace the factory-farming and mass-killing of our fellow
creatures.

One might wonder sceptically: are most people really going to eat gourmet
vatfood, even if it's cheaper and more palatable than flesh from butchered
non-human animals?  If we may assume that vatfood is marketed properly,
yes. For if we discover that we prefer the taste of vat-grown meat to
carcasses of dead animals, then the moral arguments for a cruelty-free
diet will probably seem much more compelling than they do at present.

Yet even if we have global veganism, surely there will still be terrible
cruelty in Nature? Wildlife documentaries give us a very Bambified
view of the living world: it doesn't make good TV spending half an hour
showing a non-human animal dying of thirst or hunger, or slowly being
asphyxiated and eaten alive by a predator. And surely there has to be a
food chain? Nature is cruel; but predators will always be essential on
pain of a population explosion and Malthusian catastrophe?

Not so. If we want to, intelligent agents can use cross-species
depot-contraception4, redesign the global ecosystem, and rewrite the
vertebrate genome to get rid of suffering in the rest of the natural
world too. For non-human animals don't need liberating; they need looking
after. We have a duty of care, just as we do to human babies and toddlers,
to the old, and the mentally handicapped. This prospect might sound
remote; but habitat-destruction means that effectively all that will
be left of Nature later this century is our wildlife parks. Just as
we don't feed terrified live rodents to snakes in zoos - we recognise
that's barbaric - will we really continue to permit cruelties in our
terrestrial wildlife parks because they are "natural"?

The last frontier on Planet Earth is the ocean. Intuitively, running
compassionate ecosystems might seem too complicated. But the exponential
growth of computer power and nanorobotic technologies means that we can
in theory comprehensively re-engineer marine ecosystems too. Currently
such re-engineering is still impossible; in a few decades, the task
will be computationally feasible but challenging; eventually, it will be
technically trivial. So the question is: will we actually do it? Should
we do it - or alternatively should we conserve the Darwinian status
quo? Here we are clearly in the realm of speculation. Yet one may appeal
to what might be called The Principle Of Weak Benevolence. Unlike the
controversial claim that superintelligence entails superempathy, The
Principle Of Weak Benevolence doesn't assume that our technologically
and cognitively advanced descendants will be any more morally advanced
than we are now.

Let's give a concrete example of how the principle applies. If presented
today with the choice of buying either free-range or factory-farmed
eggs, most non-vegan consumers will pick the free-range eggs. If
battery-farmed eggs are one penny cheaper, most people will still pick
the "cruelty-free" option. No, one shouldn't underestimate human malice,
spite and bloody-mindedness; but most of us have at least a weak bias
towards benevolence. If any non-negligible element of self-sacrifice
is involved, for example if free-range eggs cost even 20 pence more,
then sadly sales fall off sharply. My point is that if - and it's a
big if - the sacrifice involved for the morally apathetic could be made
non-existent or trivial, then the abolitionist project can be carried
to the furthest reaches of the living world.

David Pearce (2007 plus 1 & 2)
