
Quantum Ethics?  Suffering in the Multiverse

        ABSTRACT The Abolitionist Project outlines how humans and
        transhumans may use biotechnology to abolish suffering in all
        sentient life. The last experience below hedonic zero in our
        forward light-cone may be a precisely dateable event a few
        centuries hence. Sadly, this utopian-sounding outcome may not
        be nearly as wonderful as it sounds. For if a "block-universe"
        conception of spacetime is true, then suffering occurring in
        what we naively call "the past" is as real and unalterable
        as what we call "the present". Moreover, post-Everett quantum
        mechanics suggests that Darwinian life abounds elsewhere in the
        Multiverse. In the vast majority of quasi-classical macroscopic
        branches in which sentient life arises, no hominin-like
        creatures will evolve capable of rewriting their own source
        code and abolishing pain, misery and malaise. So "future"
        suffering persists indefinitely too. Worse, if Linde's chaotic
        eternal inflation scenario should turn out to be true, then the
        amount of suffering in Reality is increasing exponentially. Its
        extirpation in any one pocket universe like our own would be
        a purely local phenomenon. The only crumb of comfort to be
        drawn from this analysis is that the scenarios sketched are all
        extremely speculative.


The Abolitionist Project lays out the case for abolishing suffering via
biotechnology; and cautiously predicts that our posthuman descendants
will live, in effect, happily ever after. A heart-warming tale? Yes, in
a sense. However, any rosy conception of the world which this scenario
inspires is potentially misleading. Here are three depressing reasons why:

First, on a "block universe" interpretation of the world - mandated by
the Theory of General Relativity - the Darwinian Era perpetually occupies
the space-time coordinates it does. The pain and suffering of primordial
life can't be erased. At best, we are poised merely to determine its
boundaries. A full scientific understanding of time remains elusive. Yet
barring some unimaginable revolution in our entire logico-conceptual
scheme, rational agents can't extinguish the frightful events happening
elsewhere in space-time. The past is fixed and unalterable. Admittedly,
the feasibility of backward-causation suggested by quantum-mechanical
"delayed-choice" experiments is a tantalising complication to this
generalisation. Some advocates of time-symmetric causality like Lev
Vaidman stress how well the two-state vector formalism dovetails with
Everett's multiverse. Quantum cosmology suggests that future and past
quasi-classical histories alike are non-unique. But we can safely state
that even the most godlike of our post-human successors can't eradicate
their terrible origins.

In practice, even professed utilitarians are much more relaxed about
tragedies occurring in what we call the past, especially the distant
past, than about what unfolds in the future. This statement of human
psychology is reflected in our asymmetric attitudes to our own past and
future pain. Compare one's joyful relief on leaving the dentist with
one's dread at an imminent dental appointment. By the same token, mature
posthumans - for whom the Darwinian Era belongs to distant antiquity - may
find the ghastliness of their ancestors' suffering seems less important,
"less real" - than everyday Heaven-on-Earth, assuming (problematically)
that future life chooses to contemplate its dreadful birth-pangs at
all. But whether such primitive nastiness is commemorated or forgotten,
the horrors of Darwinian life are a fixture of Reality; and these horrors
are not diminished by spatio-temporal distance. Sub specie aeternitatis,
all here-and-nows are equally real.

Secondly, our best fundamental theory of the world is quantum mechanics;
and our best understanding of the quantum formalism suggests that we live
in a Multiverse rather than a classical universe. Post-Everett quantum
mechanics (i.e. the universal Schrödinger equation or its relativistic
analogue without any ill-motivated "collapse of the wave function")
discloses the existence of a multitude of macroscopic branches rather
than a single unique history. The fact that most of these classically
inequivalent branches interfere only minimally with each other explains
the popular soubriquet "Many Worlds", though the term can mislead the
unwary. In the vast majority of these macroscopic world branches, no
complex structures can arise, let alone sentient life; the coupling
constants of the forces of Nature and other "fundamental" parameters
in such branches are wrong. Their sterility still leaves googols of
branches where information-bearing self-replicators evolve via natural
selection. Critically, in only a small minority of these populated
branches of the Multiverse can intelligent agents arise who are able
to eradicate the biological substrates of their own suffering. In
branches where, for example, a meteorite didn't wipe out the non-avian
dinosaurs, Darwinian life "red in tooth and claw" presumably continues
indefinitely. This is because only language-using tool-users can
ever master the rudiments of science; and then go on to devise the
biotechnology needed to rewrite their own genetic code and redesign their
global ecosystem. To the best of our knowledge, no reptile could ever
do this. Yes, we should beware of naïve, anthropocentric definitions of
intelligence; but this cognitive constraint rules out self-emancipation
in the overwhelming bulk of branches of the Multiverse that support life.

To advance such a conjecture isn't dogmatically to claim that only members
of the genus Homo could ever initiate a post-Darwinian transition. Passage
through this choke-point may be possible via species in other biological
taxa thanks to the phenomenon of convergent evolution. We simply don't
know. Thus if ape-like marsupials were ever to evolve in Australia, for
instance, then it is possible that one species would also have stumbled
on the suite of adaptations needed to liberate their own phenotypes and
then the rest of the living world. But either way, most life-supporting
branches of the Multiverse are inaccessible to techno-scientific
agency. And TV sci-fi dramas aside, we can't do anything about life
in this (comparative) abundance of god-forsaken worlds. Interstellar
rescue missions are in theory feasible if sentient life exists elsewhere
in our galaxy, and maybe even our local galactic supercluster. [Unless
our understanding of physics is fundamentally wrong, the accelerating
expansion of the universe precludes full-blown cosmic-engineering] But
we can't tamper with other branches of the universal wavefunction. The
evolution of the universal wavefunction is continuous, linear, unitary
and deterministic. One may hope modern physics is mistaken; but if it
isn't, we're stuck.

What might be the practical implications of post-Everett quantum
mechanics for intelligent moral agents? One practical implication of the
reality of other macroscopic branches might be to compel a systematic
reassessment of our notions of "acceptable" risk. Recognition of the
freakish unlikelihood of various desired outcomes does not stop most of
us playing the National Lottery; but the converse doesn't hold. Thus we
are accustomed to thinking that various nasty scenarios are of negligible
likelihood, and even vanishingly small possibility; and then disregarding
them altogether in the way we behave. Yet if a realistic interpretation of
quantum mechanics is correct, then all these physically possible events
actually happen, albeit only in low-density branches of the universal
wavefunction. So one should always act "unnaturally" responsibly,
driving one's car not just slowly and cautiously, for instance, but
ultracautiously. This is because one should aim to minimise the number
of branches in which one injures anyone, even if leaving a trail of
mayhem is, strictly speaking, unavoidable. If a motorist doesn't leave
a (low-density) trail of mayhem, then quantum mechanics is false. This
systematic re-evaluation of ethically acceptable risk needs to be adopted
world-wide. Post-Everett decision theory should be placed on a sound
institutional, research and socio-economic footing, not just pursued
by responsible Everettistas on an individual basis. The ramifications
of the Everett interpretation of quantum mechanics are ethically too
momentous for purely private initiative. Our moral intuitions fail
because natural selection equipped us to deal with a classical world
rather than a Multiverse. Human beings tend to discount "remote" risks
by treating the probability of such events as zero. Ultimately, perhaps
ethical decision-making should be performed by quantum supercomputers
doing felicific calculus across world-branches; quantum ethics may be
computationally too difficult even for enhanced post-human brains. For
it's worth stressing that Everett's relative state interpretation of
quantum mechanics doesn't propose "anything goes". The branching structure
of the Multiverse precisely replicates the probabilities predicted by the
Born rule. There are no branches supporting civilisations in the middle
of the Sun. Nor are there any branches where, for instance, one of the
world's religions is true (as distinct from believed to be true): Everett
is not a theory of magic. But the universal wavefunction does encode
hell-worlds beyond our worst nightmares, albeit at very low density.

Perhaps it's worth noting, too, that many physicists still don't accept
Everett, or at least suspend judgement. Yet this is typically more out
of incredulity at what the equations [and experimental evidence] are
telling us, not because of any evidence that the unitary Schrödinger
dynamics breaks down at large scales.

Thirdly, some speculative work in contemporary theoretical physics
suggests that even the multiverse of Everettian quantum mechanics doesn't
remotely exhaust the totality of suffering. For there may be googols of
other multiverses. Suffering may exist in other post-inflationary domains
far beyond our light cone; and in countless other "pocket universes"
on variants of Linde's eternal chaotic inflation scenario; and in
myriad parent and child universes on Smolin's cosmological natural
selection hypothesis; and among a few googols of the other 10500+
different vacua of string theory; and even in innumerable hypothetical
"Boltzmann brains", vacuum fluctuations in the (very) distant future of
"our" Multiverse. These possibilities are not mutually exclusive. Nor
are they exhaustive. Thus some theorists believe we live in a cyclic
universe, for instance; and that the Big Bang is really the Big Bounce.

Of course, the theories alluded to above are highly speculative. They are
far removed from our everyday experience and experimental test. Even if
one or more of these theories is correct, it is tempting implicitly to
suppose that the suffering of sentient beings occupying such realms is
(somehow) less real than our own: metaphysical theories imply, in some
sense, only metaphysical suffering. This comfortable assumption would
be wrong-headed, not to say complacent. If any of the above hypotheses
are substantively true, then the suffering of victims embedded therein
is no less real than our own. Moreover in the case of other branches
of "our" multiverse, it's debatable whether the branches are even
"metaphysical". Not merely is their existence implied by empirically
well-attested theory. Strictly speaking, interference effects from other
quasi-classical branches never disappear; they merely become vanishingly
small. Interference effects between different "worlds" can in principle
be quantified by decoherence functionals. Their inferred real existence
isn't just airy philosophising.

* * *

Faced with this fathomless immensity of suffering, a compassionate mind
may become morally shell-shocked, numbed by the sheer enormity of it
all. Googolplexes of Holocausts are too mind-wrenching to contemplate. We
might conclude that the amount of suffering in Reality must be infinite -
and hence any bid to minimise such infinite suffering would still leave
an infinite amount behind. A sense of moral urgency risks succumbing to
a hopeless fatalism.

Thankfully such moral defeatism is premature. For it is not at all
clear that physically realised infinity is a cognitively meaningful
notion. Infinities that crop up in the equations of theoretical physics
have always hitherto turned out to be vicious; and yield meaningless
results. Doubts about physically embodied infinity arise, not because
one presumes to "tell God or the Devil how to construct the world"
("Einstein, stop telling God what do do" - Niels Bohr) but because of
doubts that the claim of physically realised infinity is well-defined
or even intelligible. Granted, some kind of "as if" platonism - and
"Cantor's paradise" [or demonic bestiary] - may be mathematically
fruitful. Yet it's doubtful whether Reality supports any abstract objects,
let alone an ontology of physically realised infinities, notionally
large or small. If Reality is indeed finite rather than infinite, then
the suffering in the world is presumably infinitesimal compared to truly
infinite suffering. So we should be grateful for small mercies. But the
sheer scale of such suffering as indubitably does exist still swamps
human comprehension. Mercifully, we can't grasp the potential real-world
implications of our own notation.

The tenor of this narrative would be contested by many
non-utilitarians. Why focus exclusively on suffering? Lighten up! There
is so much more to life. Why not think about life's joys? Temperamental
optimists will tend to have mood-congruent thoughts about the plenitude
of unsuspected wonders that modern physics' expanded vision of Reality
entails rather than focus on the nasty side of existence. But if you
are an ethical utilitarian, then the relative importance of anything
isn't a mere subjective value-judgement but a matter of objective fact,
written into the fabric of the world. Extreme emotional intensity of
experience morally matters most. Since the extremes of suffering dwarf
the mundane pleasures of Darwinian life, they should presumably dominate
any narrative outline of its features. And Darwinian life is statistically
far more common in the Multiverse than post-Darwinian life.

A classical utilitarian might respond that it is more appropriate to focus
on the unimaginable glories of our superhappy descendants rather than
dwelling on the nastiness of Darwinian life. Yes, branches supporting
such sublime superhappiness may be unrepresentative of sentience in
the Multiverse as a whole - though the numbers become complicated if
superintelligence hypothetically converts the accessible universe into
blissful computronium. But assuming that the intensity of well-being
of posthuman superbliss will surpass the comparatively dim awareness
of ancestral minds, possibly by several orders of magnitude, then
such superbliss matters far more than dim Darwinian consciousness
too. As a consequence, posthuman superbliss should dominate our
narrative. Analogously, any history of contemporary life on Earth should
focus, not on its inordinate number of beetles, but on human beings. The
negative utilitarian, for whom minimising suffering is the absolute moral
priority, will of course find such a response unsatisfactory. There is
nothing dim about Darwinian consciousness if, say, you are a grieving
parent who has just lost a child. Or, more prosaically, if you have
a toothache.

This discussion contains a controversial assumption which if confounded
will make the story sketched here even darker. The controversial
assumption is that when intelligent agents have attained the technical
means to abolish the biological substrates of suffering, they will almost
invariably do so. Thus by implication, suffering will be abolished in
the great preponderance of branches where humans [or their functional
counterparts] decipher their own genetic source code and develop
biotechnology. A subsequent cross-branch reproductive revolution of
designer babies is effectively inevitable. This generalisation might
seem an extraordinarily reckless prediction. Forecasting is perilous
enough even if one is a classical one-worlder. So predicting that a
highly speculative scenario (i.e. the abolition of suffering) will
eventually play out in the vast bulk of branches of macroscopic worlds
with inhabitants attaining our level of technological development - and
conversely, predicting that only a vanishingly small density of such
branches will retain suffering indefinitely - might seem foolhardy in
the extreme. Perhaps so. Recall how opiophobia still retards the medical
treatment of even "physical" pain. Yet let's suppose instead that the
analogy with anaesthetics holds up. After the discovery of general
anaesthesia, its surgical use was contentious for a decade or two. But
pain-free surgery soon became universally accepted. In our current state
of ignorance, there is no way we can rigorously calculate the probability
density of branches of the Multiverse where anaesthesia was discovered
and rejected. But at worst, it's fair to say the proportion of branches
is extremely small. Branches where governments outlaw pain-free surgery
aren't sociologically credible. Of course the abolition of psychological
distress is a less clear-cut case than anaesthesia. Technologies
to abolish mental pain are in their infancy. But let's assume that
in future they can be made as technically clean and successful as
surgical anaesthesia. In what proportion of such branches will some or
all people reject mental superhealth indefinitely? Again, a case can
be made (though it won't be attempted here) that the proportion will
be vanishingly small. Unfortunately, the proportion of life-supporting
branches of the Multiverse whose dominant species reaches this stage of
technical development is extremely small too. So the anticipated local
success of the abolitionist project touted here is not as wonderful news
as it sounds.

What practical lessons, if any, should be drawn from this bleak
analysis of Reality? Assume, provisionally at any rate, a utilitarian
ethic , or simply the weaker assumption that, other things being equal,
suffering is best avoided. The abolitionist project follows naturally,
in "our" parochial corner of Hilbert space at least. On its completion,
if not before, we should aim to develop superintelligence to maximise
the well-being of the fragment of the cosmos accessible to beneficent
intervention. And when we are sure - absolutely sure - that we have
done literally everything we can do to eradicate suffering elsewhere,
perhaps we should forget about its very existence.

David Pearce (2008, last updated 2015)
